I choose to define "magic" in ff14 as anything that manipulates aether, and with that definition we can see that there's roughly two different kinds of magic—the kind that draws on aether from external sources and the kind that only draws from internal ones. Really basic magic is possible with internal reserves alone, and we see this in canon with various parts of the thm/blm and cnj quests. But there are limits to that, and without specialized training you're likely to get yourself killed from burning through all your aether. So this makes me wonder—how would people learn to draw on ambient aether to use their magic? My idea is that it's something that they have to learn to sense somehow, and they do that by breaking down the barrier that separates their corporeal aether from the ambient.

Enabling that free exchange allows someone to refill their aether reserves simply by being present in an aether-rich area, but more than that, I think it also "attunes" them to the aether currents around them. I think that with proper training, one could learn to "read" the flow and disturbances in the aether flowing through them, which would not only allow them to gain a better understanding of the aetheric qualities of the area, but possibly even enable them to sense anything around them that is also using aether in some way. I think everyone who is able to attune to an aetheryte would already understand how this works in a limited capacity, because when you do that, you're exchanging aether with it, passing corporeal aether to something that is not and receiving non-corporeal aether in exchange. But jumping from that—attune to this physical object—to externally powered magic—attune to literally everything around you—is a big leap. The principle is the same, but you need to like, really understand and have a good idea of what you want before you can even try, because by nature there isn't really a physical anchor that you can pinpoint on. You're trying to open up your aether to everything, and that's surprisingly difficult. This is why disciplines like arcanamia or astromancy are still very prevalent. They also involve attuning to some external thing, but that thing is a real, physical object, which makes manipulating its aether much easier to figure out.

The way this all relates to Tessa is that she learned how to draw from ambient aether from a book in the Cabinet of Curiosity, saw no reason why she shouldn't incorporate that into her studies on making better spells, and no one has told her off about it yet. Red magic is all about efficiency, because it's supposed to rely entirely on your internal aether, and she knows this, but she also can't resist the draw of figuring out how much further she can push her ideas if she allows herself to draw small amounts of ambient aether too. We also know that ambient aether can posses different qualities depending on location—presumably it has to do with what specific currents are flowing in and out of any one place—and this ends up being pretty significant when she starts trying to utilize it. There's always a loss of potential when she needs to convert her own aether into a specific type, but if she's in a place where the aetheric aspect is tipped in a specific direction, she needs to do a lot less work gathering the energy needed for a spell that matches that aspect.

There's one more little bit of imagery that I really like about vivomancers (from Melissa Caruso's Swords and Fire series)—there are devices that they can use to "turn off" their magic, but this also cuts them off from being able to even sense the life around them. I'd imagine it'd feel much the same with someone willingly closing off their corporeal aether from everything around them. because it's essentially an extra layer of perception, sort of like aethersight but more...instinctual, so turning that off is like putting on a blindfold if you've kept that channel open for so long that you're used to it. There's also probably something that could be said about the planet itself being a living thing, and with how aether currents tend to be unevenly distributed, some places probably feel a lot more comfortable than others. Like, I'd imagine that Mor Dhona just feels....off.
